src/pages/about/index.md, before:

---
layout: ../../templates/markdown.astro
title: About
description: About PolyWolf, owner of wolfgirl.dev, because they're a developer and a wolfgirl
---

## Who Am I?
Hi I'm PolyWolf! Like the domain name suggests, I am a wolfgirl and enjoy programming and finally got around to making a website about it.

### No My Real Name
it's a secret ;)

### Why?
idk man maybe i just want to rp as a wolfgirl on the internet in peace is that too much to ask??

## What Stuff Do I Do?

* School (90% of my time rn)
* Browse [Twitter](https://twitter.com/p0lyw0lf)
* Program in Rust
* Art, rn mostly figure drawing + doodles because i am beginner baby

## Do I Have Lore?
Really cringy, not-fleshed out lore, yes

### May You See It?
No :)

## Do I Say "nya~"?
No, I'm not a catgirl

## Do I Accept Headpats?
Yes!

## Do I Accept Commissions?
You do not want to commission me. Unless it's for a programming project in which case my rate is $100/hr

## How To Contact Me
See the [links](/links) page.

Commit message:

misc updates to info and links

src/pages/about/index.md, after:

---
layout: ../../templates/markdown.astro
title: About
description: About PolyWolf, owner of wolfgirl.dev, because they're a developer and a wolfgirl
---

## Who Am I?
Hi I'm PolyWolf! Like the domain name suggests, I am a wolfgirl and enjoy programming and finally got around to making a website about it.

### Real Name?
it's a secret ;)

### Why?
idk man maybe i just want to rp as a wolfgirl on the internet in peace is that too much to ask??

### Pronouns
To refer to PolyWolf the fictional character, use "she"! To refer to PolyWolf the real person writing this website, use "they"! Bit complicated sorry!

## What Stuff Do I Do?

* School (90% of my time rn)
* Browse [Twitter](https://twitter.com/p0lyw0lf)
* Program in Rust
* Art, rn mostly figure drawing + doodles because i am beginner baby
* Go for long runs

## How To Contact Me
See the [links](/links) page.

## Miscellaneous Info

### Do I Say "nya~"?
No, I'm not a catgirl

### Do I Accept Headpats?
Yes!

### Do I Accept Commissions?
You do not want to commission me. Unless it's for a programming project in which case my rate is $100/hr
