---
title: "How should I store my blog posts?"
description: ""
tags: ["programming"]
published: 1726930332
---

Originally published on Cohost.

---

now that Astro has their [Content Layer API](https://astro.build/blog/astro-5-beta/#stable-content-layer) coming in their next major release, I'm suddenly a lot more flexible in how I can host the markdown files that power my blog, no longer limited to just "checked in to the Git repo". To go along with a time-honored tradition, let's make a table!

<table>
<th>
<td>Git</td>
<td>S3</td>
<td>SQLite</td>
<td>Third-party CMS<td>
</th>
<tr>
<td>Backup-ability</td>
<td>Very, almost required</td>
<td>Manually, tied to provider's CLI</td>
<td>Manually, w/ scp</td>
<td>?</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Snapshot-ability</td>
<td>Very, required</td>
<td>Somewhat, potentially automatic, but probably not going to</td>
<td>Somewhat, probably manual, but probably not going to</td>
<td>Probably Not<td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Astro Load-ability</td>
<td>Easy</td>
<td>Potentially easy</td>
<td>Potentially hard</td>
<td>Easy if supported, potentially hard if not<td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Use My Own Post Composer</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>No, but maybe that's better?<td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Editable w/o Post Composer</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>Not Easily</td>
<td>Even Less Easily</td>
<td>Likely No<td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Ease Of Post Composer Posting</td>
<td>Very</td>
<td>Pretty</td>
<td>Sort Of</td>
<td>Very<td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Ease Of Post Composer Editing</td>
<td>Not Very</td>
<td>Pretty</td>
<td>Sort Of</td>
<td>Very<td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Deployment Solution?</td>
<td>Already Built</td>
<td>Not Built</td>
<td>Not Built</td>
<td>Not Built<td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Supports Drafts?</td>
<td>No</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>Probably<td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Also Stores Media?</td>
<td>Yes, but it shouldn't</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>No</td>
<td>Probably?<td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Category</td>
<td>Git</td>
<td>S3</td>
<td>SQLite</td>
<td>Third-party CMS<td>
</tr>
</table>

yep, as expected, making a table was very helpful! it really seems like Git is still the best solution, followed by S3 as a close second. Doing more research, it seems like "Git-based CMS" is a not-uncommon thing, so really I'm pretty good where I am already.

The biggest thing I might change is moving the image files out of my Git repository. It makes clones take a lot longer than needed, right now they're actually the largest part of redeploys. I _think_ having them be hosted from a S3 + Cloudflare combination & using Astro's Remote Image Functionality will help speed up build times, because that _should_ be faster than pulling them thru Git. idk tho we'll see.
