src/pages/projects.md, before:

---
layout: ../templates/MarkdownPage.astro
title: Projects
description: A list of PolyWolf's past (and maybe current?) programming projects
---

These are my "successful" projects; if you want to see unsuccessful ones too, visit my [GitHub](https://github.com/p0lyw0lf).

## How I Post To My Blog

[crossposter](https://github.com/p0lyw0lf/crossposter) is a bit of a strange project. It originally started out as a way for me to post to my [Cybersec](/cybersec/) page from a Discord server, but also grew into a SolidJS posting frontend for my [Blog](/blog/), both very fancy "Git-based CMS"-es. This tool is very in-line with my [Write Your Own Tools](/blog/2024-09-28-write-your-own-tools/) philosophy; it is intended for use by me & me only.

## A Toy Compiler

[pwcc](https://github.com/p0lyw0lf/pwcc) is PolyWolf's C Compiler, a project made by following Nora Sandler's [Writing A C Compiler](https://nostarch.com/writing-c-compiler) book (ISBN-13: 9781718500426). I'm still working on it whenever I feel like it, mostly as an excuse to do more Rust metaprogramming lol.

## This Very Website

[website](https://github.com/p0lyw0lf/website)

~~Made using [Zola](https://www.getzola.org/), a static site generator powered by Rust! Theme is my own.~~ Out of date as of July 2022

Now made using [Astro](https://astro.build/), a static site generator powered by ew stinky JavaScript, but man does it have some nice syntax and other features that make writing custom HTML components (like I do) so convenient.

## A Tool For You To Reboot Into Arch Linux From Windows

[wootctl](https://github.com/p0lyw0lf/wootctl)

This is very adapted for my dual-boot setup, which uses [systemd-boot](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Systemd-boot) as a bootloader. It can read UEFI variables to override what's in its configuration (which has Windows as the default), so I made a windows tool to edit those variables. The name comes from `bootctl`, the systemd tool for Linux to edit these variables, and **_W_**indows.

## A Discord Bot That Tells You How Long It Is Until Tuesday

[tuesdaybot](https://github.com/p0lyw0lf/tuesdaybot)

The concept of "Tuesday" is a running joke among my friends so I made this bot.

## A Tool To Edit Song Metadata So That iTunes Doesn't Complain

[p2_tagging](https://github.com/p0lyw0lf/p2_tagging)

I really forget why I named it this. Anyways I've been (mostly legally) downloading music to put into playlists, and found that a lot of the formatting on the metadata isn't consistent between platforms. Having my iPhone be the main place I care about metadata, and Spotify be the main place I care about getting songs from, I made a tool to automatically query Spotify song metadata and put it on a local file that's in a format iTunes can import. It started out as just a CLI app but I added a GUI since editing metadata that way is a lot easier.

## A Discord Bot That Filters Swears And Does Some Other Stuff Too

[Dotl-Bud](https://github.com/p0lyw0lf/DotL-Bud)

This bot is **_really old_**. Like, I started it between Sophmore/Junior year of HS old. And yet, it still works fine (for now), helping moderate the discord for the [Daughter of the Lilies](https://www.daughterofthelilies.com/dotl/part-1-a-girl-with-no-face) webcomic, sending out page updates and having random image functionality too.

## Wait That's It?

Yeah I have some other cool projects associated with my irl identity but can't share them here for reasons :)

Commit message:

wip: render simple markdown pages
I should probably break out the functionality for parsing the markdown
frontmatter into something more common, but i can do that later :3

src/pages/projects.md, after:

---
title: "Projects"
description: "A list of PolyWolf's past (and maybe current?) programming projects"
---

These are my "successful" projects; if you want to see unsuccessful ones too, visit my [GitHub](https://github.com/p0lyw0lf).

## How I Post To My Blog

[crossposter](https://github.com/p0lyw0lf/crossposter) is a bit of a strange project. It originally started out as a way for me to post to my [Cybersec](/cybersec/) page from a Discord server, but also grew into a SolidJS posting frontend for my [Blog](/blog/), both very fancy "Git-based CMS"-es. This tool is very in-line with my [Write Your Own Tools](/blog/2024-09-28-write-your-own-tools/) philosophy; it is intended for use by me & me only.

## A Toy Compiler

[pwcc](https://github.com/p0lyw0lf/pwcc) is PolyWolf's C Compiler, a project made by following Nora Sandler's [Writing A C Compiler](https://nostarch.com/writing-c-compiler) book (ISBN-13: 9781718500426). I'm still working on it whenever I feel like it, mostly as an excuse to do more Rust metaprogramming lol.

## This Very Website

[website](https://github.com/p0lyw0lf/website)

~~Made using [Zola](https://www.getzola.org/), a static site generator powered by Rust! Theme is my own.~~ Out of date as of July 2022

~~Now made using [Astro](https://astro.build/), a static site generator powered by ew stinky JavaScript, but man does it have some nice syntax and other features that make writing custom HTML components (like I do) so convenient.~~ Out of date as of February 2026

Now made using my custom SSG named [driver](https://github.com/p0lyw0lf/driver). It's very fancy with incremental rebuilds for super sped :3

## A Tool For You To Reboot Into Arch Linux From Windows

[wootctl](https://github.com/p0lyw0lf/wootctl)

This is very adapted for my dual-boot setup, which uses [systemd-boot](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Systemd-boot) as a bootloader. It can read UEFI variables to override what's in its configuration (which has Windows as the default), so I made a windows tool to edit those variables. The name comes from `bootctl`, the systemd tool for Linux to edit these variables, and **_W_**indows.

## A Discord Bot That Tells You How Long It Is Until Tuesday

[tuesdaybot](https://github.com/p0lyw0lf/tuesdaybot)

The concept of "Tuesday" is a running joke among my friends so I made this bot.

## A Tool To Edit Song Metadata So That iTunes Doesn't Complain

[p2_tagging](https://github.com/p0lyw0lf/p2_tagging)

I really forget why I named it this. Anyways I've been (mostly legally) downloading music to put into playlists, and found that a lot of the formatting on the metadata isn't consistent between platforms. Having my iPhone be the main place I care about metadata, and Spotify be the main place I care about getting songs from, I made a tool to automatically query Spotify song metadata and put it on a local file that's in a format iTunes can import. It started out as just a CLI app but I added a GUI since editing metadata that way is a lot easier.

## A Discord Bot That Filters Swears And Does Some Other Stuff Too

[Dotl-Bud](https://github.com/p0lyw0lf/DotL-Bud)

This bot is **_really old_**. Like, I started it between Sophmore/Junior year of HS old. And yet, it still works fine (for now), helping moderate the discord for the [Daughter of the Lilies](https://www.daughterofthelilies.com/dotl/part-1-a-girl-with-no-face) webcomic, sending out page updates and having random image functionality too.

## Wait That's It?

Yeah I have some other cool projects associated with my irl identity but can't share them here for reasons :)
